+++
title = "Oathbreaker Update: 2022-04-29"
draft = false
date = 2022-04-29
template = "blog.html"
+++

# Oathbreaker Update: 2022-04-29

Almost exactly one year after I began working on my roguelike (on May 1, 2021),
I'm pleased to announce the first [playable
release](https://github.com/kiedtl/roguelike/releases/tag/v1.0.0).

*Getting caught by a bunch of javelineers after being spotted by a watcher:*
![screenshot](https://tilde.team/~kiedtl/images/rl/apr29-release1.png)

*Inspecting a (wounded) lead turtle:*
![screenshot](https://tilde.team/~kiedtl/images/rl/apr29-release2.png)
![screenshot](https://tilde.team/~kiedtl/images/rl/apr29-release3.png)

This version may be playable, but it's probably not enjoyable. The game's scope
is rather small: few enemies, few melee options, few consumables, etc. Rings,
which were supposed to be a major game mechanic, have only one option (the Ring
of Lightning) which is given to the player by default. The UI is rather
unpolished, omitting some information which could be highly useful to the
player. Additionally, since I didn't spend 1/4 of the time I should have spent
playtesting, there's probably a lot of very unbalanced areas of the game. I hope
to fix these issues in the coming releases, but for now this version can be
considered an alpha release.

*Inspecting a Frozen Fiend:*
![screenshot](https://tilde.team/~kiedtl/images/rl/apr29-release4.png)

*Getting into an argument with said Frozen Fiend:*
![screenshot](https://tilde.team/~kiedtl/images/rl/apr29-release5.png)

If you wish you try out this version, head over to the
[repository](https://github.com/kiedtl/roguelike) and grab a binary from the
releases. Note that Oathbreaker requires Linux and a truecolor terminal (and a
good Unicode font); I eventually plan to support Windows and a nice SDL display
but it's nothing close to being a high priority.

Check out the
[intro](https://github.com/kiedtl/roguelike/blob/master/doc/intro.md) for some
basic information. It's not complete, so don't hesitate to contact me for
clarifications or other questions. General feedback is also welcome, of course.
